Presentation Title: AnAssessment of Oral Health on the Pine Ridge Indian ReservationResearch Focus:Oral HealthSchool: University of Colorado Denver | Anschutz Medical CampusPresentation Type: Poster and Oral PresentationsAbstract:An Assessment of Oral Health on the PineRidge Indian ReservationJoaquin R Gallegos, Terry Batliner, DDS, MBA, John T Brinton, MS, Dallas M Daniels, RDH, BS, Anne Wilson, DDS, MS, Maxine Janis, MPH, RDH, Kimberly E Lind, MPH, Deborah H Glueck, PhD, Judith Albino, PhD.Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health, University of Colorado, Colorado School of Public HealthWe assessed the oral health of the Pine Ridge Oglala Lakota people, described a new oral health assessment tool for Indigenous people, and suggested ways to improve Native oral health. The Check Up Study team of dentist and dental hygienists performed examinations of teeth and oral soft tissue for a convenience sample of 292 adults and children.Screening personnel counted the number of decayed, filled, sealed and total teeth, used probes to measure periodontal disease, and screened for oral lesions. Half of adults had 27 or fewer teeth.Sixteen percent of adults had at least one tooth with a pocket depth > 6mm.Participants had higher numbers of decayed teeth (p<0.0001), and lower numbers of filled teeth (p<0.0001) than those reflected in Indian Health Service cross-tribe aggregated data from 1999. Amongst Lakota people of Pine Ridge, our study documented a high prevalence of caries and periodontal disease, numerous people with missing teeth, and many unmet dental needs. Future studies of oral health related behaviors, and access to oral health care are needed to explain the dental, periodontal, and soft tissue problems that adversely affect the Oglala Lakota.**********HIGH SCHOOLResearcher: Wyatt DunhamPresentation Title: The Citrus Solution: Phase IIResearch Focus:Utilizing citrus pectin and citrus peels as filtrates for heavy metal pollutants found in a Superfund Site and the effects on Daphnia magna before and after filtration.School: Grove High SchoolPresentation Type:Poster PresentationAbstract:The purpose of this experiment was to test the effectiveness of composite filters made from citrus peels and citrus pectin along with charcoal and sand on removing heavy metal pollutants from the waters of Tar Creek. A toxicity test was also done before and after filtration using Daphnia magna. Charcoal and sand were used as filtrates to decrease the TDS and neutralize the 
pH of the water after filtration. Daphniamagnawere used as toxicity test before and after filtration. It was hypothesized that the composite filters (citrus + sand +charcoal) will decrease the heavy metal concentration, neutralize the pH, and decrease the TDS after filtration. It was also hypothesized that a higher percentage of Daphnia magnawill survive in the filtered water as compared to the unfiltered water.Water samples were collected from four different sites at Tar Creek. Each water sample went through four different citrus filters plus one control (sand + charcoal). All the citrus filters decreased the heavy metal concentration after filtration. All of the filters neutralized the pH. The citrus peel filters for Site 4 were the only filters to have a pH of 7 after filtration.  Only 25% of the citrus filters decreased the TDS after filtration, while 50% of the control filters decreased the TDS after filtration.